guide: ML Pipelines (1): Defining Pipelines & Stages (#3414)
iterative/dvc.org: content/docs/user-guide/machine-learning-pipelines/defining-pipelines.md

reproduces pipeline stages, the underlying code should ideally follow these
rules:

- Read/write exclusively from/to the specified <abbr>dependencies</abbr> and
  <abbr>outputs</abbr> (including parameters files, metrics, and plots).

- Completely rewrite outputs. Do not append or edit.

- Stop reading and writing files when the `command` exits.

Also, if your pipeline reproducibility goals include consistent output data, its
code should be
[deterministic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deterministic_algorithm) (produce
the same output for any given input): avoid code that increases
[entropy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_entropy) (e.g. random numbers,
time functions, hardware dependencies, etc.).

</details>

## Directed acyclic graph (DAG)

DVC represents a pipeline internally as a graph where the nodes are stages and
the edges are _directed_ dependencies (e.g. A before B). In order for DVC to
execute the pipeline reliably, its topology should be _acyclic_ -- because
executing cycles (e.g. A -> B -> C -> A ...) would continue indefinitely. [More
about DAGs].

Use `dvc dag` to visualize (or export) pipeline DAGs.

> [more about dags]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph

Reviewer: A suggestion but not a strong opinion: it feels technical and more like what I would expect from reading the linked Wikipedia article.

Airflow docs for comparison: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts/dags.html.

Reviewer 2: > it feels technical

That's the idea 🙂

## `dvc.yaml` metafiles

There are two ways to define <abbr>stages</abbr>. The first and recommended

> method is by writing `dvc.yaml` files directly (`stages` list). The other one is

Reviewer: Even for me, it's still painful to write `dvc.yaml` from scratch. Realistically, it's much easier to copy and paste to start from some template. 

Would it make sense to have some example `dvc.yaml` that includes common fields like `deps`, `params`, `outs`, `metrics`, `plots`? I see one example below but maybe it's too simple?

Reviewer 2: > have some example dvc.yaml that includes common fields like deps, params, outs, metrics, plots?

A simple one with `deps` and `outs` is 2 paragraphs down (see [review app](https://dvc-org-iesahin-ug-pipe-qykfpz.herokuapp.com/doc/user-guide/machine-learning-pipelines/defining-pipelines#dvcyaml-metafiles)). We're not getting to params, metrics and plots yet.

> via `dvc stage add`, a limited command-line interface to stage setup.

Reviewer: Should we mention `dvc exp init` or does it complicate things?

Reviewer 2: Here's what it would look like, WDYT?
```suggestion
via `dvc stage add` or `dvc exp init`, limited command-line interfaces to stage
(and [ML experiment]) setup.

[ml experiment]: /doc/user-guide/experiment-management/experiments-overview
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should mention `exp init` in the top of the `stage add` ref instead?

Reviewer: I think it's fine without it. If users are specifically interested in "pipelines," `exp init` is probably not what they are looking for.

</admon>

Let's look at a sample `preprocess` stage that runs command
`python src/preprocess.py`. It depends on the corresponding Python script and on
a raw data file (ideally already [tracked with DVC]).

```yaml
stages:
  preprocess:
    cmd: python src/preprocess.py
    deps:
      - data/raw
      - src/preprocess.py
    outs:
      - data/preprocessed
```

<admon type="info">

We use [GNU/Linux](https://www.gnu.org/software/software.html) in our examples,
but Windows or other shells can be used too. Note that while DVC is
platform-agnostic, the commands you define may have environment-specific
requirements.

</admon>

You can write the `dvc.yaml` file above directly, or DVC can do it for you with
the following call:

```dvc
$ dvc stage add --name preprocess \
                --deps src/preprocess.py \
                --deps data/raw \
                --outs data/preprocessed \
                python src/preprocess.py
```

<admon type="tip">

One advantage of using `dvc stage add` is that it will verify the validity of
the arguments provided (otherwise they won't be checked until execution). A
disadvantage is that advanced pipelining features such as [templating] are not

> always available this way.

Reviewer: Great point. Do you think we should add any more detail in this guide to at least hint at what kind of templating and advanced syntax can be used in `dvc.yaml` to make pipelines more flexible?

Reviewer 2: > more detail in this guide to at least hint at what kind of templating and advanced syntax can be used in dvc.yaml

I think that's all covered in https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/project-structure/dvcyaml-files rn. We could def have a section to list **Advanced features** more specifically I suppose, do you think it's worth it? I expect more traffic in the `dvc.yaml` "guide" (actually a reference I think) that links back to here for further details.

[calculates a hash]:
  /doc/user-guide/project-structure/internal-files#structure-of-the-cache-directory

</admon>

File system-level dependencies are defined in the `deps` list of `dvc.yaml`;
Alternatively, using the `--deps` (`-d`) option of `dvc stage add` (see the
previous section's example).

<details>

### External dependencies: click to learn more.

A less common kind of dependency is a _URL dependency_. Instead of files in a
local disk, you can `dvc import` data from another <abbr>DVC project</abbr> (for
example hosted on GitHub). External dependencies establish relationships between
different projects or systems (see `dvc import-url`).
[Get all the details](/doc/user-guide/external-dependencies).

<admon type="info">

DVC will use special methods to check whether the contents of an URL have
changed for the purpose of stage invalidation.

</admon>

</details>

## Parameter dependencies

A more ML-specific type of dependency is the _hyperparameter_ (`params` field).
These are simple values used inside your code to tune data processing, modeling
attributes, or that determine stage execution in any other way. For example, a

> [random forest classifier] may require a _maximum depth_ value.

Reviewer: Again, not a strong opinion, but frequently there are also items in `params` that are not ML hyperparameters. It feels a bit out of context to get into these ML-specific details in this guide, especially since there are non-ML users for pipelines.

Reviewer 2: > a bit out of context to get into these ML-specific details in this guide

Good point, you're right (removed ML deets). Should we call the doc "Data Pipelines" though? Using that for now... Just _Pipelines_ is too generic I think.

Instead of hard-coding it, your code can read param values from a parameters
file. `dvc params` can track any key/value pair inside structured YAML, JSON,
TOML, or Python files (see also `dvc.api.params_show()`). DVC will keep track of
params as granular dependencies: it will only invalidate the stage if that part
of the file has changed.

> Parameters are defined under the `params` set of `dvc.yaml`. Each entry is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameters are defined under the `params` section of `dvc.yaml`. Each entry is the
```

key string to look for the param value in the default params file, `params.yaml.

> Sub-list under custom params file names can also be included.

Reviewer: What do you think about also mentioning that you can track groups of params and entire params files?

Reviewer 2: > track groups of params and entire params files

👍🏼 mentioned it now.

```yaml
stages:
  featurize:
    cmd: ...
    ...
    params:
      - learning_rate  # from params.yaml
      - deep_learning.json:
          - epochs     # from custom deep_learning.json file
```

[random forest classifier]:

>   https://medium.com/all-things-ai/in-depth-parameter-tuning-for-random-forest-d67bb7e920d

Reviewer: What about outputs? I see a lot of great detail on deps but seems like outputs is missing?

Reviewer 2: > What about outputs?

Leaving it for a separate PR (WIP) which will be in another page of this section of the UG. Originally it was planned to also metrics and plots but not sure about the latter, as it would overlap with your work in https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/pull/3830...

Reviewer 2: > outputs... will be in another page of this section of the UG. Originally it was planned to also metrics and plots...

Originally this page wasn't called "Defining pipelines" either. So maybe you're right and we can have a single **Outputs** section here that links to separate metrics and plots guides in the future. TBH Idk 😵‍💫

Reviewer: So is the plan to have a follow-up PR with the outputs soon? Just want to make sure there's a plan to add that info before merging this one.

Reviewer 2: > if this page has deps it should have outs

Outputs are mentioned in the **Stages** section for now but I'm still not sure whether they'll end up in this same page or in a separate one.

> So is the plan to have a follow-up PR with the outputs soon? 

Yes, the master plan is 3-4 pages: this one (**Defining Pipelines**), **Reproducing Pipes**, **Pipeline Ops** (or "Operationalizing"?), and maybe **Experiment(al) Pipes**. WDYT @dberenbaum ?

Reviewer 2: @dberenbaum I ended up including **Outputs** here after moving the **Stage command** section to the dvc.yaml guide/ref. PTAL.
